include:
• Readability: A key limitation of DeepSeek-R1-Zero is that its content is often not suitable
for reading. Responses may mix multiple languages or lack markdown formatting to
highlight answers for users. In contrast, when creating cold-start data for DeepSeek-R1,
we design a readable pattern that includes a summary at the end of each response and
filters out responses that are not reader-friendly. Here, we define the output format as
|special_token|<reasoning_process>|special_token|<summary>, where the reasoning
process is the CoT for the query, and the summary is used to summarize the reasoning
results.
• Potential: By carefully designing the pattern for cold-start data with human priors, we
observe better performance against DeepSeek-R1-Zero. We believe the iterative training is
a better way for reasoning models.
2.3.2. Reasoning-oriented Reinforcement Learning
After fine-tuning DeepSeek-V3-Base on the cold start data, we apply the same large-scale
reinforcement learning training process as employed in DeepSeek-R1-Zero. This phase focuses
on enhancing the model’s reasoning capabilities, particularly in reasoning-intensive tasks such
as coding, mathematics, science, and logic reasoning, which involve well-defined problems with
clear solutions. During the training process, we observe that CoT often exhibits language mixing,
particularly when RL prompts involve multiple languages. To mitigate the issue of language
mixing, we introduce a language consistency reward during RL training, which is calculated
as the proportion of target language words in the CoT. Although ablation experiments show
that such alignment results in a slight degradation in the model’s performance, this reward
aligns with human preferences, making it more readable. Finally, we combine the accuracy of
reasoning tasks and the reward for language consistency by directly summing them to form the
final reward. We then apply RL training on the fine-tuned model until it achieves convergence
on reasoning tasks.
2.3.3. Rejection Sampling and Supervised Fine-Tuning
When reasoning-oriented RL converges, we utilize the resulting checkpoint to collect SFT
(Supervised Fine-Tuning) data for the subsequent round. Unlike the initial cold-start data, which
primarily focuses on reasoning, this stage incorporates data from other domains to enhance the
model’s capabilities in writing, role-playing, and other general-purpose tasks. Specifically, we
generate the data and fine-tune the model as described below.
Reasoning data
We curate reasoning prompts and generate reasoning trajectories by perform-
ing rejection sampling from the checkpoint from the above RL training. In the previous stage,
we only included data that could be evaluated using rule-based rewards. However, in this stage,
we expand the dataset by incorporating additional data, some of which use a generative reward
model by feeding the ground-truth and model predictions into DeepSeek-V3 for judgment.
Additionally, because the model output is sometimes chaotic and difficult to read, we have
filtered out chain-of-thought with mixed languages, long parapraphs, and code blocks. For
each prompt, we sample multiple responses and retain only the correct ones. In total, we collect
about 600k reasoning related training samples.
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Non-Reasoning data
For non-reasoning data, such as writing, factual QA, self-cognition,
and translation, we adopt the DeepSeek-V3 pipeline and reuse portions of the SFT dataset of
DeepSeek-V3. For certain non-reasoning tasks, we call DeepSeek-V3 to generate a potential
chain-of-thought before answering the question by prompting. However, for simpler queries,
such as “hello” we do not provide a CoT in response. In the end, we collected a total of
approximately 200k training samples that are unrelated to reasoning.
We fine-tune DeepSeek-V3-Base for two epochs using the above curated dataset of about
800k samples.
2.3.4. Reinforcement Learning for all Scenarios
To further align the model with human preferences, we implement a secondary reinforcement
learning stage aimed at improving the model’s helpfulness and harmlessness while simultane-
ously refining its reasoning capabilities. Specifically, we train the model using a combination
of reward signals and diverse prompt distributions. For reasoning data, we adhere to the
methodology outlined in DeepSeek-R1-Zero, which utilizes rule-based rewards to guide the
learning process in math, code, and logical reasoning domains. For general data, we resort to
reward models to capture human preferences in complex and nuanced scenarios. We build
upon the DeepSeek-V3 pipeline and adopt a similar distribution of preference pairs and train-
ing prompts. For helpfulness, we focus exclusively on the final summary, ensuring that the
assessment emphasizes the utility and relevance of the response to the user while minimizing
interference with the underlying reasoning process. For harmlessness, we evaluate the entire
response of the model, including both the reasoning process and the summary, to identify and
mitigate any potential risks, biases, or harmful content that may arise during the generation
process. Ultimately, the integration of reward signals and diverse data distributions enables us
to train a model that excels in reasoning while prioritizing helpfulness and harmlessness.
2.4. Distillation: Empower Small Models with Reasoning Capability
To equip more efficient smaller models with reasoning capabilities like DeepSeek-R1, we directly
fine-tuned open-source models like Qwen (Qwen, 2024b) and Llama (AI@Meta, 2024) using
the 800k samples curated with DeepSeek-R1, as detailed in §2.3.3. Our findings indicate that
this straightforward distillation method significantly enhances the reasoning abilities of smaller
models. The base models we use here are Qwen2.5-Math-1.5B, Qwen2.5-Math-7B, Qwen2.5-
14B, Qwen2.5-32B, Llama-3.1-8B, and Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct. We select Llama-3.3 because its
reasoning capability is slightly better than that of Llama-3.1.
For distilled models, we apply only SFT and do not include an RL stage, even though
incorporating RL could substantially boost model performance. Our primary goal here is to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the distillation technique, leaving the exploration of the RL
stage to the broader research community.
3. Experiment
Benchmarks
We evaluate models on MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020), MMLU-Redux (Gema
et al., 2024), MMLU-Pro (Wang et al., 2024), C-Eval (Huang et al., 2023), and CMMLU (Li et al.,
2023), IFEval (Zhou et al., 2023), FRAMES (Krishna et al., 2024), GPQA Diamond (Rein et al.,
2023), SimpleQA (OpenAI, 2024c), C-SimpleQA (He et al., 2024), SWE-Bench Verified (OpenAI,
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---
2024d), Aider 1, LiveCodeBench (Jain et al., 2024) (2024-08 – 2025-01), Codeforces 2, Chinese
National High School Mathematics Olympiad (CNMO 2024)3, and American Invitational Math-
ematics Examination 2024 (AIME 2024) (MAA, 2024). In addition to standard benchmarks, we
also evaluate our models on open-ended generation tasks using LLMs as judges. Specifically, we
adhere to the original configurations of AlpacaEval 2.0 (Dubois et al., 2024) and Arena-Hard (Li
et al., 2024), which leverage GPT-4-Turbo-1106 as judges for pairwise comparisons. Here, we
only feed the final summary to evaluation to avoid the length bias. For distilled models, we
report representative results on AIME 2024, MATH-500, GPQA Diamond, Codeforces, and
LiveCodeBench.
Evaluation Prompts
Following the setup in DeepSeek-V3, standard benchmarks such as
MMLU, DROP, GPQA Diamond, and SimpleQA are evaluated using prompts from the simple-
evals framework. For MMLU-Redux, we adopt the Zero-Eval prompt format (Lin, 2024) in a
zero-shot setting. In terms of MMLU-Pro, C-Eval and CLUE-WSC, since the original prompts
are few-shot, we slightly modify the prompt to the zero-shot setting. The CoT in few-shot
may hurt the performance of DeepSeek-R1. Other datasets follow their original evaluation
protocols with default prompts provided by their creators. For code and math benchmarks, the
HumanEval-Mul dataset covers eight mainstream programming languages (Python, Java, C++,
C#, JavaScript, TypeScript, PHP, and Bash). Model performance on LiveCodeBench is evaluated
using CoT format, with data collected between August 2024 and January 2025. The Codeforces
dataset is evaluated using problems from 10 Div.2 contests along with expert-crafted test cases,
after which the expected ratings and percentages of competitors are calculated. SWE-Bench
verified results are obtained via the agentless framework (Xia et al., 2024). AIDER-related
benchmarks are measured using a "diff" format. DeepSeek-R1 outputs are capped at a maximum
of 32,768 tokens for each benchmark.
Baselines
We conduct comprehensive evaluations against several strong baselines, including
DeepSeek-V3, Claude-Sonnet-3.5-1022, GPT-4o-0513, OpenAI-o1-mini, and OpenAI-o1-1217.
Since accessing the OpenAI-o1-1217 API is challenging in mainland China, we report its perfor-
mance based on official reports. For distilled models, we also compare the open-source model
QwQ-32B-Preview (Qwen, 2024a).
Evaluation Setup
We set the maximum generation length to 32,768 tokens for the models.
We found that using greedy decoding to evaluate long-output reasoning models results in
higher repetition rates and significant variability across different checkpoints. Therefore, we
default to pass@𝑘evaluation (Chen et al., 2021) and report pass@1 using a non-zero temperature.
Specifically, we use a sampling temperature of 0.6 and a top-𝑝value of 0.95 to generate 𝑘
responses (typically between 4 and 64, depending on the test set size) for each question. Pass@1
is then calculated as
pass@1 = 1
𝑘
𝑘
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑝𝑖,
where 𝑝𝑖denotes the correctness of the 𝑖-th response. This method provides more reliable
performance estimates. For AIME 2024, we also report consensus (majority vote) results (Wang
et al., 2022) using 64 samples, denoted as cons@64.
1https://aider.chat
2https://codeforces.com
3https://www.cms.org.cn/Home/comp/comp/cid/12.html
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---
